---
layout: post
title: To which project do I want to contribute?
permalink: perma/2003/07/13/to-which-project-do-i-want-to-contribute
post_id: 13
categories:
- Technology
---

Developing: I'd like to contribute!

I have made small contributions to open source projects. Some on the
[Popfile](http://popfile.sf.net/) translation front, others by contributing to
[Anthill](http://anthill.vmlinuz.ca/): idea's and/or actual code. But I'd like
to do more (after all I've been using open source software so much!). One of
the things I always dread is to "get into the project". You have to read so
much: how is the architecture, get all the dependencies, read the policies
regarding commit access, testing, etc. So I'm trying to select a project on
which I want to focus for the next few months, trying to come up with some
useful patches in my free time. A couple of candidates:

 * [Apache](http://www.apache.org/)
 * [Subversion](http://subversion.tigris.org/)
 * [Anthill](http://anthill.vmlinuz.ca/)
 * [Phing](http://www.binarycloud.com/phing/)
 * [BinaryCloud](http://www.binarycloud.com/)
 * [PHP](http://www.php.net/)
 * [Mozilla](http://www.mozilla.org/)

All these projects touch my professional work as well, and that is A Good
Thing^(tm)^. I'd like to walk through these projects one by one. (This it
actually not to inform you of something I'm going to do, just my "internal"
decision making process, exposed to the rest of the world. Read it or disregard
it as you see fit :-o).

What would I like to find in a project on which I'm going to work in my (so
scarce) free time?

**Multiplatform**: I'd like to do something that I could use/develop on Linux
as well as on windows (the latter having less priority of course).

**Perspective**: It should be a project that has a lifetime in front of it (not
something that is going to be replaced in a few years, e.g. CVS<).

**Language**: Preferably a compiled language (C/C++/Java/etc.) instead of an
interpreted language (PHP/Perl/etc) because that's what I work with
professionally. I'd like to keep my skills sharp over the entire line.

**Documentation**: A project with a good organization has the advantage (e.g.
RFC's/bug reports etc. are input to a starting contributor). A HACKING.txt file
or some other documentation to orientate starting developers is an advantage!

**Easy Compile-Run-Debug cycle**: I'd like to contribute to the Linux kernel
but compiling the kernel, installing it, rebooting it: that's too long a cycle
for yours truly.

**Coolness factor**: this property of a project is undefined but working on
some projects is just cooler than working on other projects (e.g. Linux kernel
is way cool, writing man pages is definitely not :-?).

**Need for developers**: some projects are developed into their 2.x versions.
Clearly they don't need the developers as much as a 0.1beta project. If you
want to contribute something the latter has more need of you.

Alright, here is my decision matrix^(tm)^.

**_Actual decision matrix hasn't survived the last three blog software upgrades
and thanks to
[Wayback](http://web.archive.org/web/20060823190139/http://www.jilles.net/perma/category/open-source/
archive) I was able to salvage a picture:_**

![Comparison of OS projects][oscomp]

Disclaimer: my opinion, would like comments, this is _my_ opinion, these values
may or may not be based on the truth

Well if you'd take this table, I'd go working on Subversion! I'd like that very
much. But, this table itself is not definitive. So if you, the reader, know any
topics on which the above projects should be judged, before choosing a project,
please tell me and I'll include them in the above table. The same goes if you
know of any projects that might be cool for me to join. <a
href="mailto:ojilles@gmail.com">Mail me!</a> or place a comment here, or
backtrack, whatever you like.

First I've got some other stuff to finish, and in the meantime I can read
documentation and stuff, to get into this new project!

[oscomp]: {{site.baseurl}}/photos/os-software-comparison.png
