---
layout: post
title: Some good articles about product development and product management
permalink: perma/2006/04/29/some-good-articles-about-product-development-and-product-management
post_id: 28
categories:
- Technology
---

A long while ago, Joel Spolsky added a <a
href="http://joel.reddit.com/">Reddit.com site</a> just to experiment. Didn't
pay too much attention to it back then. Last evening I did visit the site, and
there is some good links there. So, not feeling that creative myself, I'll
re-post some of the more interesting links.

<a href="http://headrush.typepad.com"> Headrush</a> is a blog supposedly about
"Creating Passionate Users". Cannot attest to that myself since I didn't read
mover than 15% of the content on the site. One of the best articles is "<a
href="http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/01/death_by_riskav.html">Death
by risk aversion</a>". The article talks about always targeting the outer
extremes of scale instead of being mediocre. DO yourself a pleasure, follow
that link and just look at the 3 graphs used in the article and you will
understand what the article says.

Most of my colleagues know that I have a dog, and we (me and my girlfriend) are
pretty serious in training her. During some of the training sessions we use a
technique called the "clicker technique". It works like this: first you give
your dog a lot of little cookies, one by one. With each cookie you don't say a
thing but make a little "click" with the clicker. After a while the dog will
associate the click sound with something positive (and will actually start
drooling just by hearing the sound). Kathy connects <a
href="http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/03/clicker_trained.html">this
with e-mail addiction</a> (blackberry anyone?).

Thirdly, <a
href="http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/04/the_myth_of_kee.html">she
has a nice article</a> (still fresh!) about information anxiety and trying to
keep up with everyone else. One of the things I do personally is go <span
style="font-style: italic">really fast </span>through all my Bloglines
subscriptions and force myself to <span style="text-decoration:
underline">only</span> read two full articles, done. Too bad if the blogosphere
decided to write more than two interesting articles -- if they were so good
someone else will re-post them tomorrow and I can go for a rebound.

A second blog, called <a href="http://www.randsinrepose.com/">Rand's In
Respose</a>,  has a really nice article up about why web start ups are most of
the time failing and what to do about it. Really, the article is too long and
too good to just summarize here. So, <a
href="http://www.randsinrepose.com/archives/2006/04/20/10.html">go read it</a>!
No really, the article is good, go read it!

A second article on that blog is about the "<a
href="http://www.randsinrepose.com/archives/2005/03/20/free_electron.html">Free
Electron</a>" in your development team:

    A Free Electron can do anything when it comes to code. They can write a
    complete application from scratch, learn a language in a weekend, and, most
    importantly, they can dive into a tremendous pile of spaghetti code, make sense
    of it, and actually getting it working. You can build an entire businesses
    around a Free Electron. They're that good.

There is some gold in that article as well. Example: don't send
your Free Electron off fixing those three memory leaks:

    When he returned, the bugs were fixed and the entire database layer had been
    rewritten. A piece of code that would taken two engineers roughly six months to
    design had been totally redone in seven days. Sound like a great idea until you
    realize we were working on a small update and did not have the resources or
    time to test a brand spankin' new database layer. Oops.

That's it for now...Thanks for all the fish.
