---
layout: post
title: "Moola: \"Weekend millionaires for the rest of us\""
permalink: perma/2006/05/28/moola-weekend-millionaires-for-the-rest-of-us
post_id: 35
categories:
- Business
---

An interesting new product became available on the Internet a few months back,
called <a href="https://www.moola.com/">"Moola".</a> <a
href="https://www.moola.com/">Moola</a> is basically a free "Weekend
Millionaires" for the normal people.

It works by showing a small video before you start playing one of the games.
This video nets you $0,01, for free. You ante up this one cent in the game you
are about to play. That game is a game against someone else who also ante's up
one cent. If you win the game you end up with $0,02, and are only removed 29
wins from earning $10M. The coolest thing is that during this "ladder" you are
free to exit and get payed as long as the sum is above $10. In total Moola
already cashed out $615.000!<

Currently, Moola sports two games. One is a Rock-scissors-Paper game with a
twist, over 6 rounds. The other game I did not play yet. The games are cool in
and of themselves, but the added incentive really works.Up till here Moola
already had some exposure in the blog world, for example on <a
href="http://www.techcrunch.com/2006/05/14/moolas-interesting-business-model/">TechCrunch,</a>
and other blogs. However, I did not see any other blogs yet that wrote about
the bonuses that Moola is giving away. After me loosing my money twice Moola
decided that I needed a bit more cash to get me off and decided to sponsor my
account with 10 cents, see the screen shot below.

<img width="538" height="406" style="margin: 5px" title="Moola Booster" src="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/moola-booster.JPG" />

Anyway, this is a really interesting business model in my mind. The only
problem with it is that the objectives of the players (you and me) are not
nicely aligned with the advertisers that provide the cash. This will ultimately
hurt the ROI for the advertisers and their willingness to participate. How it
ends up we will see.

**Update**: I still have 1 invite left. Ping me if you want it!

**Update 2**: Things move fast in this space. Already there is a site called <a href="http://www.playmoola.com/">http://www.playmoola.com/</a> which <a href="http://www.playmoola.com/community/index.php?showtopic=36">sports a strategy section</a> for the games and <a href="http://www.playmoola.com/community/index.php?showtopic=86">loads of invites left seemingly.</a>
