---
layout: post
title: On innovation
permalink: perma/2006/09/16/on-innovation
post_id: 41
categories:
- Business
---

<a
href="http://www.cogmios.nl/2006/09/13/10-tips-to-become-the-innovation-company-bonus-3-free-ideas-for-your-web20-internet-startup/#comments">In
a recent blog post</a>, <a href="http://www.linkedin.com/in/internet">Edward de
Leau</a> talks about his notion of "Leanardo" -- the person that is primarily
responsible for innovation. I tend to agree in principle that these persons are
really scarce, and even if you know someone then there is still timing to wreak
havoc.

Edward goes on by providing 3 innovative ideas which he intents to revisit in a
few years time to see if some came to fruition. In my blogpost I try to make a
shortcut and safe Edward a few years:

1. A site that will crawl the internet in search of structured data (XML) of
products that are being sold. After the aggregation, the business model would
be similar to existing classifieds sites i<a
href="http://statisch.marktplaats.nl/help/kopenverkopen/beginnendeverkopers.html">including
features</a>, <a
href="http://marktplaats.custhelp.com/cgi-bin/marktplaats.cfg/php/enduser/std_adp.php?p_faqid=10">monetizing</a>
<a href="http://statisch.marktplaats.nl/help/topadvertenties/admarkt.html">eye
balls</a> and <a href="https://www.google.com/adsense/">Google AdSense</a>.

However, such an application already exists. Instead of forcing people to write
XML files and put them on a server, <a href="http://www.edgeio.com/">EdgeIO
</a>allows people to make blog posts on their already existing blogs and
aggregate that. Additional revenue stream is redistributing the aggregated
content "<a href="http://blog.edgeio.com/?p=35">EdgeSense</a>".

2. A Todo list site that brokers between people without time and with time.

This one I have not seen yet in the form I think Edward is seeing this. I
envision a generic Todo site like <a
href="http://www.tadalist.com/">Tadalist</a>, including its "<a
href="http://purpleslurple.net/ps.php?theurl=http://www.tadalist.com/#purp127">share
todo</a>" feature, but then with price brokering system where the person who
has the Todo and the person that is willing to execute the Todo can agree a
price (and potentially setting up an Escrow service).

3. A mesh up between Google Earth and anything else with a physical location.

<a href="http://www.globeassistant.com/">GlobeAssistant </a>is a company
providing technology to stream locations out of your database into a users
Google Earth application. A prime example is the leading Dutch Real Estate site
Funda.nl (try <a href="http://www.xsweb.com/funda/funda.php">this link</a> if
you have Earth installed).
