---
layout: post
title: Denmark compared to the Netherlands
permalink: perma/2008/12/20/denmark-compared-to-the-netherlands
post_id: 157
categories:
- Culture
---

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/nl-vs-dk.jpg"><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/nl-vs-dk.jpg" alt="" title="nl-vs-dk" width="325" height="93" class="aligncenter size-full wp-image-159" /></a>

What follows is a first (necessarily) relative comparison between the Dutch
culture and the Danish one on those aspects that stood out to me. Mind you, I
wrote this after being in Aarhus, Denmark for the relatively short period of  2
months.  Also, I chose to publish this before finishing all the topics I have
in mind, I'll be looking to publish those later.

I hope someone might find this interesting.

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/aarhus-1998.jpg"><img
src="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/aarhus-1998-300x205.jpg" alt="Aarhus, Denmark.
(c) Aarhus Kommune" title="aarhus-1998" width="300" height="205"
class="size-medium wp-image-158 alignleft" /></a> I have been very fortunate
with the chance my employer gave me by offering me a job in a foreign country
that fitted precisely what I wanted to do next in my career. So there I was,
finding myself moving to Aarhus, Denmark. I need to add that before this I had
not been an expat before, having lived my life in the Netherlands. I hadn't
even visited Denmark before.

I knew well in advance that that this was happening and unconsciously I was
starting to build up expectations. I figured there would be a lot of
similarities: North-western country in Europe, socialist government, small,
rainy. Some obvious differences I knew about as well. The Danish did not ratify
the Euro as their currency, keeping their Danish Kroner.

### Taxes
The first, and most obvious thing for Dutch (and perhaps other) expats moving
to Denmark will be the taxes. The VAT in Denmark is 25% versus 19% in the
Netherlands. Both DK and NL have what I call a bracketed income tax scheme: on
the first X euro/DKK you earn, you pay Y% taxes. Both countries then define
three or four brackets. In NL the highest percentage comes in at 52%, whereas
in DK this goes up to 62%. A quick example: assume someone is earning 100
euro/DKK extra and is being taxed in the highest bracket. In the Netherlands
that gives you 48 euro extra to spend, which gets further taxed (VAT) so you
are able to purchase net goods for 40,30 euro. In comparison for DK you get to
keep 38 DKK after income tax, and reducing it by the VAT you end up with 30,40
DKK. That is a whopping 25% less spending power. That is, unless...

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/taxes.jpg"><img
src="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/taxes-300x154.jpg" alt="" title="taxes"
width="300" height="154" class="alignright size-medium wp-image-160" /></a>

... you buy a car in Denmark. This is probably the most talked about feature of
the Danish tax system abroad. New cars get marked up by the government tax
system for 180%. Yes, that is hundred-and-eighty percent. Again, for
comparison, in the Netherlands this is 42,3%. After hearing this it occurred
to me that for some reason the Danish still get by as there are not an
exceptionally large amount of really old cars on the road. I can not do a full
comparison here since I do not know the first thing about what road-taxes and
insurance premiums are doing in DK. But it is astonishing none-the-less.

Now the Danish get payed more for a months work but up to this day it does not
add up. There are other aspects where the difference in the economy becomes
clear. For example, in the proverbial supermarket around the corner you will
find much less fresh vegetables and such--I am assuming here that that becomes
too expensive. In short, I do find life more expensive in Denmark.

The upshot of this is that the health care is cheap, roads are fairly good
(comparable to the Dutch roads), etc. The one thing that stood out for me were
the two public TV stations: they are commercial free. Now when I say commercial
free,  I do not just mean movies do not get interrupted for commercials but in
between movies there are no commercials. An absolute unexpected and pleasurable
experience!

### Family live, Work/Life balance
It becomes apparent quite quickly that what the Danish find important is
different from what the Dutch find important. The amount of time the Danish
spend indoors with their family and friends is much more. The Danes invite
family and friends over for dinner. It is not that there are no restaurants,
nor that there are not any people eating there but the difference is
noticeable. You will find a similar story in bars for that matter. I have not
spend enough time yet in Denmark to judge how easy it is to make friends
outside work but the Danes will be the first to tell you that that is not easy:
they are not really (as) open to this. The bonds that they entertain with their
friends are presumed to be much stronger/long lasting...

In terms of Work/Life balance I find it hard to make absolute statements since
I don't think my personal W/L balance is quite typical for the Dutch. Even so,
the Danes work 36 or 37 hours a week, start working days quite early (there is
quite  a portion of people with office jobs that start before 8am) but leave
the office early as well. It is not an exception for danish offices to be empty
at 16:00 or for stores to close around that same time. On Saturdays stores are
not open the full day either. I am quite sure that it is an objective statement
that the Danes make less hours per week than the Dutch. Please don't mistake
this for "the Dutch work harder than the Danes", etc.

### Traffic
<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/traffic-jamjp.jpg"><img
src="{{site.baseurl}}/wp-content/traffic-jamjp-244x300.jpg" alt=""
title="traffic-jamjp" width="244" height="300" class="alignright size-medium
wp-image-161" /></a>

Traffic in Aarhus is light any which way you look at it. Of course there are
cars as it is a city but I have not been in nor seen a traffic jam in Denmark.
For someone that did an hour of traffic-jams per day this is a true blessing.
Trying to determine the cause for that is way to complex but factors like car
prices, bike-adoption, city planning, etc, come to mind. The Danes are a bit
more rude in traffic than the Dutch, if someone would be pressing for my
opinion.

In terms of how the infrastructure is setup there are some differences though.
I have definitely been caught a couple of times into the "trap" (as I keep
feeling it is) of roads that go from one lane to two for all of 75 meters. This
was quite confusing and I still do not understand the rationale behind this. I
had a much more positive experience with traffic lights: they do signal orange
before jumping to green which is handy and for bonus points extra sets of
lights are mounted on the other side of the crossing which yields better views.
Taking left turns on most crossings with traffic lights is invariably a pain as
there is always oncoming traffic which is different from (most of) the
Netherlands where oncoming traffic is stopped by the lights before you turn
left.

(*Update*: <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/perma/2009/04/11/denmark-versus-netherlands-part-ii/">See here for part II in this series</a>)
